Meeting Notes 2021-06-16 (#227)
solid/authorization-panel: meetings/2021-06-16.md

Henry: It doesn't solve the problem we're trying to address. It solves the problem of Facebook asking people to enter their gmail password to allow FB to contact their friends and invite them to their social network.

Aaron: Henry, you are conflating OIDC and OAuth2. We're talking about OAuth2, not OIDC.

Henry: one does not need in depth knowledge of either technology to understand their limitations, which arise directly out of not accepting the Semantic web or linked data principles. By deliberately ignoring these technologies, they have had to come up with very awkward answers to problems that would have had clean mathematical/logical solutions otherwise.

Henry: You say we don't need the Guard. Do we now throw out the authz frameworks we have been building?

Aaron: Access Control is completely orthogonal to this. WAC and ACP are data models. UMA is a protocol.

Henry: WAC is actually a protocol:  The web is designed so you can get to a resource from anywhere. So you reach a resource, get a 401, and follow the link header to the Access Control Resource. Then decide which credential(s) to send, if any, and the server can authorize the request.

> Aaron: Both WAC and ACP are orthogonal. The Guard on the server level runtime is no longer needed, because all they need to know is: "Is the token valid for this request?" The authorization server goes to `/foo/bar`, gets a 401. (??? @bblfish: @acoburn - something missing here) UMA defines you take the value to your Authz server which gives you a token for that particular request, and that's where ACP or WAC gets evaluated.

Author: @acoburn is this something you can fix?

> Aaron: Both WAC and ACP are orthogonal. The Guard on the server level runtime is no longer needed, because all they need to know is: "Is the token valid for this request?" The authorization server goes to `/foo/bar`, gets a 401. (??? @bblfish: @acoburn - something missing here) UMA defines you take the value to your Authz server which gives you a token for that particular request, and that's where ACP or WAC gets evaluated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aaron: Both WAC and ACP are orthogonal. The Guard on the server level runtime is no longer needed, because all they need to know is: "Is the token valid for this request?" The app goes to `/foo/bar`, gets a 401 with a WWW-Authenticate header which tells a client what to do next. For example: use this OAuth2 authorization server or that UMA server or something else. The app then interacts with the authorization server whose protocol it understands and that AS produces an access token for that particular request. It is during this access token creation process that ACP or WAC is evaluated.```

# 2021-06-16 Solid Authorization

https://meet.jit.si/solid-authorization

## Agenda

* Minutes https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/pull/221
    * Previous week actions
* Follow up on previous week's UMA discussion
* [UC3 Inheritance](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/)
* [JWK in Access Control](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/discussions/225)
* [Proofs and Origins](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/discussions/223)

## Present

* Aaron Coburn
* Henry Story
* Justin B
* Elf P
* Matthieu B
* Eric P
* Martynas Jusevicius

## Minutes

### UMA discussion

> Justin: [last week](2021-06-09.md) we went through slides for consent-based workflows. Given an agent/actor who want to give access to another app/user. A trusted authorization agent helps execute these workflows. This is a general pattern, but the interaction/protocol hasn't been specified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Justin: [last week](2021-06-09.md), we went through slides for consent-based workflows. Given an agent/actor who wants to give access to another app/user, a trusted authorization agent helps execute these workflows. This is a general pattern, but the interaction/protocol hasn't been specified.
```

Justin: the interop spec just states: "apply permissions". A working, deployed private implementation with custom code (not using UMA, just secure redirects).

Justin: UMA is an implementation of this pattern with good adoption. Designed to work with the OAuth2 stack and complements some of the other standards we are using in Solid.

> Justin: this is something we can look at as a trusted pattern. Not saying "UMA or bust", but thinks we should look at the problems it can help us with.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Justin: this is something we can look at as a trusted pattern. Not saying "UMA or bust", but think we should look at the problems it can help us with.
```

Henry: What I found is that we have two things doing Authorization: the guard on the server, and this other Authorization server. This seems confusing. Why do we need two authorization systems?

> On the other hand thinking about the [launcher app](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/blob/main/proposals/LauncherApp.md) I proposed a couple of years ago, I could see how there are two Authorization roles:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Henry: On the other hand thinking about the [launcher app](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/blob/main/proposals/LauncherApp.md) I proposed a couple of years ago, I could see how there are two Authorization roles:
```

>   * the Guard on the server, authorizing access to the resource
>   * the Guard near the wallet (essentially the Launcher App) authorizing when to sign headers, give out tokens or provide credentials

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * the Guard on the server — authorizing access to the resource
  * the Guard near the wallet (essentially the Launcher App) — authorizing when to sign headers, give out tokens, or provide credentials
```

> Henry: on the one side, you may have a wallet; on the other you verify the credential. Is that what UMA is trying to do? 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Henry: on the one side, you may have a wallet; on the other, you verify the credential. Is that what UMA is trying to do? 
```

> Aaron: First of all if you have an authorization server like UMA (just a specialisation of OAuth 2), you can actually dispense the authorization guard on your AS. It leads to a much cleaner separation of concern. All you need is that the token would be valid for one specific request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aaron: First of all, if you have an authorization server like UMA (just a specialization of OAuth 2), you can actually dispense with the authorization guard on your AS. It leads to a much cleaner separation of concerns. All you need is that the token would be valid for one specific request.
```

> Henry: I am very skeptical about this. There are reasons to be skeptical, as OAuth hardly works for our use case of decentralised hyper apps fetching data by following links. (In fact it seems to me more like  a catastrophe, a point that was echoed by some in last week's discussion on the Credentials CG). This is requiring me to have to read UMA and analyse why it might be wrong or if it is right somehow. That's a lot of work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Henry: I am very skeptical about this. There are reasons to be skeptical, as OAuth hardly works for our use case of decentralized hyper apps fetching data by following links. (In fact, it seems to me more like a catastrophe, a point that was echoed by some in last week's discussion on the Credentials CG). This is requiring me to have to read UMA and analyze why it might be wrong or if it is right somehow. That's a lot of work.
```

Aaron: I think you've clearly articulated your position, thank you. OAuth is a very general authorization framework that has worked quite successfully and is widely deployed on the web today.

Henry: It doesn't solve the problem we're trying to address. It solves the problem of Facebook asking people to enter their gmail password to allow FB to contact their friends and invite them to their social network.

> Aaron: @bblfish:matrix.org you are conflating OIDC and OAuth2. We're talking about OAuth2, not OIDC.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aaron: Henry, you are conflating OIDC and OAuth2. We're talking about OAuth2, not OIDC.
```

> Henry: one does not need in depth knowledge of either technology to understand its limitations, which arise directly out of not accepting the Semantic web or linked data principles. By deliberately ignoring these technologies, they will have had to come up with very awkward answers to problems that would have had clean mathematical/logical solutions otherwise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Henry: one does not need in depth knowledge of either technology to understand their limitations, which arise directly out of not accepting the Semantic web or linked data principles. By deliberately ignoring these technologies, they have had to come up with very awkward answers to problems that would have had clean mathematical/logical solutions otherwise.
```

> Henry: You say we don't need the Guard. Do we now throw authz frameworks out we have been building?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Henry: You say we don't need the Guard. Do we now throw out the authz frameworks we have been building?
```

Aaron: Access Control is completely orthogonal to this. WAC and ACP are data models. UMA is a protocol.

> Henry: WAC is actually a protocol:  The web is designed so you can get to a resource from anywhere. So you reach resource get a 401 and follow the link header to the Access Control Resource. Then decide which credentials to send, if any, and the server can authorize the request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Henry: WAC is actually a protocol:  The web is designed so you can get to a resource from anywhere. So you reach a resource, get a 401, and follow the link header to the Access Control Resource. Then decide which credential(s) to send, if any, and the server can authorize the request.
```

> Aaron: Both WAC and ACP are orthogonal. The Guard on the server level runtime is no longer needed because all they need to know is: Is the token valid for that request? The authorization server goes to `/foo/bar`, gets a 401. (??? bblfish: something missing here) UMA defines you take the value to your Authz server which gives you a token for that particular request and that's where ACP or WAC gets evaluated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aaron: Both WAC and ACP are orthogonal. The Guard on the server level runtime is no longer needed, because all they need to know is: "Is the token valid for this request?" The authorization server goes to `/foo/bar`, gets a 401. (??? @bblfish: @acoburn - something missing here) UMA defines you take the value to your Authz server which gives you a token for that particular request, and that's where ACP or WAC gets evaluated.
```

Henry: How does the authorization server on a different POD know what the access control rules are to access a resource there? 

Aaron: A pod has a specific authorization server.

Henry: An example: I am bblfish.net and want to go to a resource `R` on justinb.net which allows access only to friends of a friend. Someone needs to look at the ACR for `R` to find out whether I have an identity in my wallet that satisfies that rule there. How does that work?

Aaron: Can I suggest that we focus on UMA instead of OAuth 101. 

> Elf: I shouldn't expect that we clarify everything over the call. Maybe do some sequence diagram to showcase how it works. Maybe after the meeting? When we talk about the guard and who is enforcing the access rules, the resource server with that token is responsible for answering to that request. Getting an access token might let you access more than one resource. It would be good to break it down with one example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Elf: I shouldn't expect that we clarify everything over the call. Maybe do some sequence diagrams to showcase how it works. Maybe after the meeting? When we talk about the guard and who is enforcing the access rules, the resource server with that token is responsible for answering to that request. Getting an access token might let you access more than one resource. It would be good to break it down with one example.
```

Henry: +1 agree on having a use case that covers how this would work on a decentralised system.

Justin: +1 detailed use case.

> There is a pretty active thread since last week in the CCG related to the VC http api; and looking at which authorization protocol it should support. The dialog was very informative to this discussion. Everybody agreed that GNAP had a lot of potential, part of the future, not fully baked. The CCG can't put forward a mature spec.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a pretty active thread since last week in the CCG related to the VC-HTTP-API, and looking at which authorization protocol it should support. The dialog was very informative to this discussion. Everybody agreed that GNAP had a lot of potential, part of the future, not fully baked. The CCG can't put forward a mature spec.
```

CCG thread i was referring to: https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-credentials/2021Jun/0009.html

Aaron: I also followed that thread.

> Henry: Our use case are not ones I have seen anyone else try to address. They are not those of the CCG I think, as far as I can make out. (the long thread from last week suggests that they are not that clear on this yet either) They are currently focused - as far as I understand - on creating ways to create credentials for institutions like passport holders.  Our use case, on the other hand, are decentralised social networks with hyper apps that follow links that can go to any number of pods simultanously.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Henry: Our use cases are not ones I have seen anyone else try to address. They are not those of the CCG, I think, as far as I can make out. (the long thread from last week suggests that they are not that clear on this yet either) They are currently focused — as far as I understand — on creating ways to create credentials for institutions like passport holders.  Our use cases, on the other hand, are decentralized social networks with hyper apps that follow links that can go to any number of pods simultaneously.
```

> Let's take a use case where an app goes from one pod to another and finds an access control rule, how is the authorization server meant to know how the access rules on a particular server are?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Henry: Let's take a use case where an app goes from one pod to another and finds an access control rule. How is the authorization server meant to know what the access rules on a particular server are?
```

Aaron: I can answer that last question: how a WAC rule is understood by an authorization server.
How does an authorization server understand the WAC rule?
It is authority on it. The AS could be completely coupled to your pod.

Henry: What if it's on another server?

Aaron: The AS controls the WAC rules.

> It doesn't have a clue about the rules on your pod. My authorization server will not be giving access to your pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aaron: It doesn't have a clue about the rules on your pod. My authorization server will not be giving access to your pod.
```

Typically with UMA you're going through a series of exchanges. Start with OIDC, then get an authorization token. The AS should know who you are.

Henry: It looks to me like we are moving away from a declarative protocol.

Justin: In the pattern I was presenting last week, someone's authorization agent is theirs. My authz agent is what you interface with to get access to my resource.

Henry: Ok. What I don't understand is why we need this, when we have WAC.  Should we go through a use case as Pavlik suggested? I can then propose how that would be done with the current technology and say the Launcher App, and we can compare that to some view of how that would work with UMA.

Justin: +1

Matthieu: +1

Elf: Do you have a UC to suggest?

Aaron: I have 3 use cases: some for simple access, one for VC exchange.

Justin: Interop use case from the slides I gave last week can be one app requests access to project data.
I really like the Acme corp VC UC.

Elf: Maybe this one https://solid.github.io/authorization-panel/authorization-ucr/#group-membership-vc?

Justin/Aaron: +1

Justin: Could we have one without VC?

> Henry: +1 one non-VC as that is new technology we don't have much experience with. A linked data Use case (eg. a friend of a friend) access control rule would be nice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Henry: +1 one non-VC as that is new technology we don't have much experience with. A linked data Use case (e.g., a friend of a friend) access control rule would be nice.
```

Elf: q+ to request that if UCR draft doesn't have the use case we add it there first.

### UC3

> Henry: In [UC3 Inheritance](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/blob/uc3-inheritance/proposals/evaluation/uc-3-inheritance.md) we have now have WAC, ACP examples and I added a WAC+ `:imports` example. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Henry: In [UC3 Inheritance](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/blob/uc3-inheritance/proposals/evaluation/uc-3-inheritance.md) we have now have WAC and ACP examples, and I added a WAC+ `:imports` example. 
```

> Matthieu: ACP does not need `ac:imports` as statement gets written down to the resources that inherits it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Matthieu: ACP does not need `ac:imports` as statement gets written down to the resources that inherit it.
```

Henry: so that needs to be filled in to the description. It is good to know that this data needs to be copied. I can then provide an acp+`:imports` example to show how ACP can benefit too, and so be DRY.

> Elf: In the case of WAC+ `ac:imports` you get the rules from the parent. With ACP wouldn't that be similar?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Elf: In the case of WAC+ `ac:imports`, you get the rules from the parent. With ACP, wouldn't that be similar?
```

Matthieu: It's similar but a different use case (reuse vs inheritance).

Henry: It is good to know that the rule is copied. This is not DRY though, so that is a problem that I also highlighted with WAC. 

Elf: I hope we can clarify difference between importing and applying reusable policy.

## Actions

* Detail how UMA would satisfy key selected use cases
    * Identity-based

>     * VC-based - https://solid.github.io/authorization-panel/authorization-ucr/#group-membership-vc

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * VC-based — https://solid.github.io/authorization-panel/authorization-ucr/#group-membership-vc
```
